US President Joe Biden has used his
address for the Muslim ID holiday to uh
to press for a ceasefire in Gaza Biden
said a pause in fighting was the best
way to save civilians from the horror of
the conflict in Gaza itself another nine
Palestinians were killed in an Israeli
strike the attack came after the Israeli
military said it would Implement a daily
tactical pause along a road in southern
Gaza to allow Aid deliv
race praying among the ruins
Palestinians marking a somber Aid in
Gaza where over 80% of the population is
living in
displacement this family Sheltering at a
un School in K yunas says there's little
left to
celebrate other people are just living
their lives they get to celebrate Eid to
sacrifice animals here there is no eat
there are no signs of celebrations no M
prayers wake up and sleep to the sound
of
strikes disrupting a relative calm an
Israeli air strike hit the B Camp
killing a number of people including
children according to a nearby
hospital what did this girl do to you
Netanyahu shame on you on the Israeli
side of the Kum Shalom Crossing with
Gaza a trucks were spotted after Israel
announced a tactical pause in fighting
near Rafa to facilitate
deliveries the 11-hour pauses apply to
12 km stretch that's the main gateway
for humanitarian Aid into the territory
the Tactical pause announcement came a
day after eight Israeli soldiers were
killed in a blast near the far southern
city Israel's Drews minority held a
funeral for one of
them Captain Wasim
[Music]
Mahmud the preparations for Eid have
become preparations to receive hundreds
of people here to offer condolences and
prepare the
funeral with the latest fatalities
Israel's military has recorded a total
of 310 deaths since the beginning of its
ground offensive in OCT over while
gaza's Hamas run Health Ministry says
more than 37,000 Palestinians have been
killed after 8 months of a devastating
War the Tactical Paws fall short of a
complete ceasefire called for by the
International Community including
Israel's closest Ally the
US well for more on this we're joined
Now by our correspondent Rebecca ritters
in Jerusalem Rebecca it seems seems
Israel's military and its government
don't really see eye to eye on the issue
of tactical pauses what more can you
tell
us yeah that's right Terry so we heard
this announcement early yesterday that
this pause this tactical pause along
this humanitarian route would be coming
into effect immediately in fact the
message said that it was had already
come into effect and was already uh had
already happened on Saturday um you know
we we weren't sure immediately whether
or not this was coordinated with the
government but very shortly after this
announcement was made it was met with
furious a furious response from some
members of the far right Coalition
Benjamin Netanyahu yah's Coalition that
uh there were there were many far-right
parties and particularly national
security minister itamar Ben he came out
saying whoever made this decision was a
fool uh and that it was evil the Finance
Minister betel smotrich came out and
said that this would undo all the good
work that they've done uh against Hamas
and this would take away from their
victories uh so and shortly afterwards
we heard reportedly from the prime
minister's office that Benjamin
Netanyahu was Furious about this
decision and that he had not been party
to it uh the latest that I've been able
to ascertain from the Israeli military
is that they have maintained this
statement uh and we certainly heard from
people on the ground eyewitness reports
saying that yesterday was a relatively
calm day uh in Gaza and that there had
been fewer air strikes and and fewer on
the ground fighting or or less I should
say uh so you know we believe at this
stage that it has been the military
didn't confirm with me that it was
completely carried out and that it would
continue but they said that this
statement they stand by it and they're
maintaining it so whether or not just
how long it will last we still don't
know because as we've seen uh the
government is is countering what the
military are doing and they're saying
they're unhappy with it so it may well
uh end but at the moment it it does
appear to be ongoing so pause ongoing uh
how much could these if there are more
pauses how much could these pauses
actually help people in Gaza
Rebecca well it's certainly you know
been welcomed this news has been
welcomed by uh the International
Community by humanitarian organizations
who uh were told coordinated with the
military on the route and some of the
details uh about this pause they have
long been calling for more humanitarian
Aid to be allowed in we know since the
operation began in early May that the
number of trucks that were already
insignificant and not enough to uh
fulfill the requirements inside Gaza but
they were uh before the operation were
hovering around 160 170 a day they
dropped after the raer incursion to just
a little under 70 a day so huge drop
eight agencies saying that 500 trucks a
day need to go in to Gaza in fact 600
trucks really need to go into Gaza but
before the war 500 trucks we're going
through and it's not a lot of numbers
but it does show you the difference uh
of of Aid you know the amount of Aid
that needs to go in versus what's going
in so obviously Aid agencies say this
will make a huge difference but it won't
solve the problem overall there are
still many other issues when it comes to
Aid distribution includ including
criminality desperate people uh you know
trying to piler what Aid is coming
through on those trucks so there are
still many other issues when it comes to
getting this Aid in we know the 300 Mill
dollar jots as it know as it's known
this pier the US built Pier has barely
been in operation since uh since they
finished that a few months ago and so
the the only way to get Aid in is
through these land Crossings the few Aid
drops that have been coming uh into are
also woefully inadequate so hopefully uh
you know obviously Ada organizations are
hopeful but they do say this is not
going to solve the crisis on its own
Rebecca thank you that was our
correspondent Rebecca rers in
Jerusalem well for more on this we can
talk now with Shaina loow she's a
Communications adviser for the Norwegian
Refugee Council which is active in the
Gaza STP she joins us from Jerusalem
Shaina do you think these tactical
pauses that the Israeli military has
announced will help civilians in
Gaza well Terry I think it's it's
important that Aid be able to actually
reach the aid agencies once once it
enters Gaza but whether or not these
tactical pauses will allow us to be able
to safely distribute Aid to all people
throughout Gaza is unclear and and
unlikely considering that Israel has
been very clear that these tactic
so-called tactical pauses will only
occur along that um small Corridor what
we need in order to really make an
impact and and start to meet the growing
needs in Gaza the continuously growing
needs in Gaza is a complete ceasefire so
that we can guarantee the Safety and
Security of Aid workers and people
coming to seek Aid at distribution
points we need uh a scaling up massive
scaling up of the amount of Aid that's
coming in which is woefully inadequate
we've been conditioned at this point to
be cheering on these Tiner uh cosmetic
changes and not and and and forgetting
to continue to push that we need much
bigger things a ceasefire safety for
humanitarians and a scaling up of Aid so
you say that more these Arrangements
need to be made elsewhere in the Gaza
Strip they shouldn't just apply to that
area down in the South how freely can
Aid workers move around the Gaza Strip
at the
moment it's very very difficult for Aid
workers to move around the Gaza Strip
and and be assured of their safety the
notification and coordination system
deconfliction system with Israel is
broken sometimes it takes hours for us
to get approval to move and by the time
that
uh we've gotten approval it's it's too
late in the day either the place that we
are going has been closed it's after
dark when our staff is not able to move
everything is just taking far too long
staff members are getting delayed at
checkpoints eight humanitarian agencies
simply cannot function under the current
circumstances uh to any uh any impactful
degree now Reef uh relief supplies are
piling up at many border crossings I
understand how how quickly can those
supplies be brought to where they are
needed
most well this tactical pause along this
route will allow for us to be able to go
and get some of the the aid that has
been piling up on the Gaza side of the
crossing once we're able to receive that
Aid and and take account of what exactly
it is that we've received then we can
start immediately going and distributing
at the sites we've already over the last
several weeks been been visiting new ID
P sites sites for internally displaced
people uh assessing the needs of course
everywhere in Gaza there's tremendous
need so once we're able to access that
Aid we will do our best to try and
distribute it as quickly as
possible what about the kind of Aid that
is getting into Gaza and should be
getting into Gaza what kind of Aid is
most urgently needed in Gaza right
now the most urgent aid of course is
food and medicine as we see that that
more than half of Gaza is on the brink
of starvation that famine is is looming
if not already um present in parts of
Gaza so we need food and medicine but on
top of that with so many people
displaced since Israel announced it its
Rafa operation in May and started
issuing uh the so-called evacuation
orders calling on people to leave we
have a huge need for shelter materials
people are sleeping in in tents people
are sleeping in makeshift shelters with
whatever salvaged material materal they
can find and many people are just simply
sleeping on the streets because they
have nowhere uh to sleep and and so
shelter materials are essential wash uh
Water Sanitation hygiene materials are
needed because there's a sewage problem
there's a sanitation problem basically
everything is needed in Gaza at this
point but of course given the number of
people suffering from food insecurity we
need to see a massive scaling up of food
into
Gaza Shaina thank you very much for
talking with us that was Sha of the
Norwegian Refugee Council speaking to us
from Jerusalem